Let's talk about the actors.
For the playwrights,
it was common before
where the actors end up saying
something else instead of their lines.
What's your take on that?
You go first.
It's fine with me as long as
the story doesn't change.
But...
As long as it's still
the same character.
'Cause you shape the language
in order to build the character.
But it reaches the point
where the actor inserts lines...
The playwright can't do much anyway
even if it's not working out
when the actor's on stage
nothing can be done.
You can't say stop.
They usually do ad libs, right?
How about you?
Maybe when the point gets clouded.
Because every line has an objective.
So if she adds something
that clouds the main point, even a chunk--
It's okay to do ad libs
in order to make it more entertaining.
- But if it clouds the point--
- The actor gets carried away.
Yeah, or if she deviates
from her character
because she wants
to show off or whatever.
But if they forget the lines,
I understand that kind of thing.
My concern is just when
the main point gets clouded.
But I don't have issues
on changing or rephrasing the text
as long as it comes out naturally
and it works for the actor.
I have lines where
it's the thought that counts
so it's okay for it to change.
But there are lines for later scenes
the actor might've overlooked,
on the same context,
or if it's a punchline
that she didn't understand.
So there are some...
Non-negotiables.
There are non-negotiables
you need to clearly tell actors about
and explain the lines
and its references.
I think that's an enriching experience
for actors and directors,
at least from my perspective.
Even if you don't change the line,
there are three beats and units you could do.
Like, “I love you.”
It's possible to do
and the meaning can change.
Those are the tools
that actors and directors play with,
so the word doesn't have to be changed
because the beat could change mid-word.
That happens sometimes.
That's what's exciting to do.
Personally, I also have so much respect for,
I guess, for the written word in general,
so even if Herbie prohibited ad libbing,
I wouldn't ad lib on my life.
We all have our roles.
Director, writer, actor.
I will not rewrite
what you put down.
It's unbelievable,
although some actors are given...
- Free reign to ad lib.
- Free reign.
As long as it's within context
of the character.
For me, I think not doing an ad lib
is deeply ingrained in me.
Unless there's really no...
Unless your co-actor forgot.
Things like that.
Or they were absent.
- Or someone skipped lines.
- You have to continue ad libbing.
It also feels good as an actor
when you're able to make
the lines feel organic.
When you watch it,
even me as an audience,
When the words feel like
it actually came from the actor,
it's amazing how actors
can deliver the lines organically.
That's also interesting to watch.
Sometimes actors complain
about "unnatural” parts,
but they'll act it out and then--
It's just right.
It seems unnatural
but when they act it out,
it all comes together.
I also like it
when an actor has this role
and she acts it out even if she disagrees
with the character's thought process.
And then years later,
you see each other again
your perspective seems right
and she now understands the character.
Sometimes, characters don't share
the same psyche as we artists do.
- Yes.
That's also what
we look out for in actors
because they tend to disagree
how the character should be.
That's your judgment.
That's your truth,
your educational background
so you have to move away
from that point of view.
I also think that if you’re an actor
you should be neutral,
I think you should breathe life
into whatever role's given to you.
Not that you’re not thinking about it,
but sometimes I really feel like some actors
especially the more senior ones
or not even the seniors,
I don’t know if they’re practicing
their need to express themselves
but they're questioning it beyond
what they should be questioning as actors
and I find it rather unfair
whether to the writer or to the director,
Do you have anything else
you want to say?
For me, today it made me think
as a playwright not as a director.
Although I trained as a director,
I found a voice in playwriting early on.
It made me wonder quite recently
because I haven’t really written anything,
I’ve been directing more
these past years more than writing.
It surprised me,
why there's a sudden interest
on a work I’ve done
so many years ago.
I’m referring to "Buwan at Baril",
in fact, when it was brought up
for re-production,
I was like, “Why? It's so ancient,”
When I read it, it's so...
Dated.
I was actually very seriously concerned
if it was gonna work.
Even when you called me,
I don’t think this will work today, no?
But then again, of course
to my pleasant surprise,
it worked well.
and I thought that
the readings in the present
give it an amazing--
You also did the version of it.
I said, why?
And then I realized that
It was the world
that I was so familiar with
and you begin writing from that place
and trust that world
and see what
that kind of world opens to you.
And I think
many truths--
that point where you're most truthful
because you know
that world so well
and we want to write
about that truth
I guess that would tide
you over through the years
and in a way,
I think that is the characteristic of the piece.
That's why it withstood time
because you started
from a place of truth.
I'm going to respond to "Buwan at Baril"
because I feel like what we're
looking for in a piece
are the materials
that are timely and timeless.
These two things.
and that was the "Buwan at Baril" for us.
- Of course when you are writing that you don't
- Yes, you don't know that
- For me, it is very time bound
Write about something new.
It has  to be something really...
you have passion for,
you know you feel for
because that's where things emerge--
especially in the early years
so that you can practice
within the realm that you know.
Sometimes, I have a problem
when I read some of the plays.
The writer doesn't seem
to know what she's doing
because it doesn't feel like
it's grounded to the truth.
So when you say, "write about something"
that’s so grounded in...
I think that’s really important
when I read the script,
that I don't feel that.
I don’t like the writers just
imagining stuff for the heck of it
or feeling like
she can just imagine things.
You can tell, right?
There are scripts
that just have that ground.
Plus that kind of integrity.
That's what I'm looking for.
And again it doesn’t
have to be perfect
but you know in its core,
there's a seed planted.
Write something new and feel for it.
For writers, you should
expand your experiences in different areas.
So you get to write this one,
and it’s going to be grounded with truth.
I think that qualifies
Kazuo Ishiguro's stand
that you don’t have to write
from your personal experience
But you really to have to write
about something that you know.
And if you don't know,
you have to do some extensive research
until it's almost palpable to you.